benchmark/performance.md, before:

# Performance

Overall, the performance of this library is positioned roughly in the middle between the fast and slow libraries, and can be considered average.
In all benchmarks, the speed is nearly equivalent to `freer-simple`, only slightly slower.

In the State benchmark, it is about 3-6x faster than `polysemy` and about 2-7x slower than `effectful`.

In the Throw/Catch benchmark, it is slightly faster than `effectful` in the fastest case, and at least 2x as fast as `polysemy` in the other cases.

Non-deterministic computations are somewhat slow;
in cases with a shallow effect stack, they are about 5x slower than `fused-effects`.
However, because their performance in terms of stack depth is better than that of `fused-effects`,
they catch up to `fused-effects` in speed at around a depth of 5.
Since among the practical extensible effects libraries, only `fused-effects` and `freer-simple` support non-deterministic computations,
this shouldn't be too much of a problem.

The coroutine performance is on par with `freer-simple`, maintaining similar speed without any noticeable degradation compared to other effects.
Moreover, the other libraries such as `eff` and `mpeff`, aside from this library and `freer-simple`, likely suffer from the $O(n^2)$ issue mentioned in the "Reflection without Remorse" paper.
In comparison, these libraries are significantly slower, approximately 50x slower with $n=1000$ (as shown in the measured results) and about 500x slower with $n=10000$.

Furthermore, since there are differences among libraries in their support for higher-order effects and continuations,
please note that, for example, in the Throw/Catch benchmark, only libraries that support higher-order effects are included in the comparison.

## Reproduction
The benchmark code is available at [heftia-effects/bench](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/heftia-effects/bench).
To run the benchmarks, move your working directory to the root directory of the `heftia` repository and execute
 [`./benchmark/bench.sh`](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench.sh).

## Benchmark Results

* State Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![countdown.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/countdown-shallow.svg)

* State Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![countdown.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/countdown-deep.svg)

* Throw/Catch Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![catch.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/catch-shallow.svg)

* Throw/Catch Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![catch.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/catch-deep.svg)

Note: Here, the $5 + (5 - N) + N$ corresponds to the interpretation stack of `catchHeftiaDeepN` represented below:

```haskell
catchHeftiaDeep0, catchHeftiaDeep1, catchHeftiaDeep2, catchHeftiaDeep3, catchHeftiaDeep4, catchHeftiaDeep5 :: Int -> Either () ()
catchHeftiaDeep0 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep1 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep2 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep3 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep4 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep5 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n

run :: Heftia.Eff eh (Heftia.Ask () ': ef) a -> Heftia.Eff eh ef a
run = Heftia.runAsk ()
```

* NonDet Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![nondet.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/nondet-shallow.svg)

* NonDet Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![nondet.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/nondet-deep.svg)

* Coroutine Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![coroutine.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/coroutine-shallow.svg)

* Coroutine Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![coroutine.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/coroutine-deep.svg)

Commit message:

[add] performance comparison table from mtl.

benchmark/performance.md, after:

# Performance

Overall, the performance of this library is positioned roughly in the middle between the fast and slow libraries, and can be considered average.
In all benchmarks, the speed is nearly equivalent to `freer-simple`, only slightly slower.

In the State benchmark, it is about 3-6x faster than `polysemy` and about 2-7x slower than `effectful`.

In the Throw/Catch benchmark, it is slightly faster than `effectful` in the fastest case, and at least 2x as fast as `polysemy` in the other cases.

Non-deterministic computations are somewhat slow;
in cases with a shallow effect stack, they are about 5x slower than `fused-effects`.
However, because their performance in terms of stack depth is better than that of `fused-effects`,
they catch up to `fused-effects` in speed at around a depth of 5.
Since among the practical extensible effects libraries, only `fused-effects` and `freer-simple` support non-deterministic computations,
this shouldn't be too much of a problem.

The coroutine performance is on par with `freer-simple`, maintaining similar speed without any noticeable degradation compared to other effects.
Moreover, the other libraries such as `eff` and `mpeff`, aside from this library and `freer-simple`, likely suffer from the $O(n^2)$ issue mentioned in the "Reflection without Remorse" paper.
In comparison, these libraries are significantly slower, approximately 50x slower with $n=1000$ (as shown in the measured results) and about 500x slower with $n=10000$.

Furthermore, since there are differences among libraries in their support for higher-order effects and continuations,
please note that, for example, in the Throw/Catch benchmark, only libraries that support higher-order effects are included in the comparison.

Below is a table showing the speedup factor of `heftia` when `mtl` is set to 1x (`mtl`'s computation time divided by `heftia`'s computation time).
Larger values indicate that `heftia` is faster.

| Benchmark             | Speedup       |
| --------------------- | ------------- |
| state, shallow        | 1.64x         |
| state, deep           | 5.74x         |
| throw/catch, shallow  | 0.32x         |
| throw/catch, deep     | 1.14 - 6.96x  |
| nondet, shallow       | 0.20x         |
| nondet, deep          | 0.66x         |

## Reproduction
The benchmark code is available at [heftia-effects/bench](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/heftia-effects/bench).
To run the benchmarks, move your working directory to the root directory of the `heftia` repository and execute
 [`./benchmark/bench.sh`](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench.sh).

## Benchmark Results

* State Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![countdown.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/countdown-shallow.svg)

* State Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![countdown.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/countdown-deep.svg)

* Throw/Catch Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![catch.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/catch-shallow.svg)

* Throw/Catch Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![catch.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/catch-deep.svg)

Note: Here, the $5 + (5 - N) + N$ corresponds to the interpretation stack of `catchHeftiaDeepN` represented below:

```haskell
catchHeftiaDeep0, catchHeftiaDeep1, catchHeftiaDeep2, catchHeftiaDeep3, catchHeftiaDeep4, catchHeftiaDeep5 :: Int -> Either () ()
catchHeftiaDeep0 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep1 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep2 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep3 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep4 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ run $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n
catchHeftiaDeep5 n = Heftia.runPure $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ Heftia.runThrow $ Heftia.runCatch @() $ run $ run $ run $ run $ run $ programHeftia n

run :: Heftia.Eff eh (Heftia.Ask () ': ef) a -> Heftia.Eff eh ef a
run = Heftia.runAsk ()
```

* NonDet Effect Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![nondet.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/nondet-shallow.svg)

* NonDet Effect Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![nondet.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/nondet-deep.svg)

* Coroutine Benchmark (Shallow Effect Stack):
![coroutine.shallow](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/coroutine-shallow.svg)

* Coroutine Benchmark (Deep Effect Stack):
![coroutine.deep](https://github.com/sayo-hs/heftia/blob/v0.4.0/benchmark/bench-result/coroutine-deep.svg)
